# Building a Data Warehouse ETL pipeline for Sparkify

## Introduction

A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

As their data engineer, you are tasked with building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights in what songs their users are listening to. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.

## Description

In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on data warehouses and AWS to build an ETL pipeline for a database hosted on Redshift. To complete the project, you will need to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.

## Project Datasets

### Song Dataset

The first dataset is a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

And below is an example of what a single song file, TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json, looks like.

{"num_songs": 1, "artist_id": "ARJIE2Y1187B994AB7", "artist_latitude": null, "artist_longitude": null, "artist_location": "", "artist_name": "Line Renaud", "song_id": "SOUPIRU12A6D4FA1E1", "title": "Der Kleine Dompfaff", "duration": 152.92036, "year": 0}

### Log Dataset

The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.

The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are filepaths to two files in this dataset.

And below is an example of what the data in a log file, 2018-11-12-events.json, looks like.

{"artist":"Pavement", "auth":"Logged In", "firstName":"Sylvie", "gender", "F", "itemInSession":0, "lastName":"Cruz", "length":99.16036, "level":"free", "location":"Klamath Falls, OR", "method":"PUT", "page":"NextSong", "registration":"1.541078e+12", "sessionId":345, "song":"Mercy:The Laundromat", "status":200, "ts":1541990258796, "userAgent":"Mozilla/5.0(Macintosh; Intel Mac OS X 10_9_4...)", "userId":10}

## Schema for fact table and dimensional tables

### Fact table:

1. songplays table - songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimensional tables

1. users table - user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

2. songs table - song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

3. artists table - artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude

4. time table - start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Schema for staging tables - (stagingevents and stagingsongs tables)

1. stagingevents table - event_id, artist, auth, firstName, gender, itemInSession, lastName, length, level, location, method, page, registration, sessionId, song, status, ts, userAgent, userId

2. stagingsongs table - num_songs, artist_id, artist_latitude, artist_longitude, artist_location, artist_name, song_id, title, duration, year


## Project Steps

Below are steps you can follow to complete each component of this project.

1. Setup a redshift cluster on AWS and insert the connection details in dwh.cfg.
2. Create the needed the database structure by executing create_tables.py.
3. Process the data from the configured S3 data sources by executing etl.py.

